$Id: README,v 1.1 2002/11/18 23:58:17 makholm Exp $ -*- text -*-

This is Mosmake, a makefile infrastructure that helps manage the
(re)compilation of programs written in Moscow ML 2.0. It needs GNU
make and Perl to work. See mosmake.dvi or mosmake.info for more
information.

Copyright (c) 2002 Henning Makholm
All rights reserved.

Mosmake is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

Mosmake is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
for more details.

Installation instructions
=========================

The `mosmake-X.Y.tar.gz' tarball unpacks to a directory `mosmake-X.Y'
with several files in it. Copy all the files to a suitable
subdirectory of your own project directory, and follow the instructions
in the manual.

It only makes limited sense to install Mosmake centrally at a site,
except as a source for copying into project directories. You _can_ use
Mosmake as installed in a central location, but if you distribute your
code without a copy of Mosmake, your users will not be able to build
it. So you might as well copy it to your project.

If you're concerned about space, you can remove the files
`mosmake.dvi', `mosmake.info' and `mosmake.info-NNN'; they are
formatted versions of this manual. A further saving could be obtained
by also removing the _source_ of the manual, which is `mosmake.txi0',
but doing so would be a disservice to people who want to play with
change in your program, because the build process will be completely
mysterious without documentation.
